PS L-CS\TCPL\CN\> more chapter_1.md
====

The C Programming Language Chapter 1 - A Tutorial Introduction

**1.1 Getting Started**

  Inside Powershell:
  
    PS cc hello.c
    PS ./a
    hello, world
    
  
  A C program consists of *functions* and *variables*, A function contains *statements* that specify the computing 
  operations to be done, and variables store values used during the computation.
  
  The main() function is a special function where everything begins execution.

  <p align='center'>**Syntax table of hello.c**</p>

  <table>
    <tr>
        <td>Code</td>
        <td>Description</td>
        <td>Code Line</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>#include <"stdio.h"></td>
        <td>include info about standard library</td>
        <td>hello.c:1:1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>main()</td>
        <td>defines a function called main</td>
        <td>hello.c:3:1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>{}</td>
        <td>statements of main are enclosed in braces</td>
        <td>hello.c:4:1, hello.c:6:1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>printf("hello, world!\n");</td>
        <td>prints sequence of characters</td>
        <td>hello.c:5:1</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  
  The names in the parenthesis of a function is called a parameter and "hello, world!\n" in printf() is called an 
  argument.

  printf() is a library function that *prints output*. The example of libraries must be 'stdio.h'
  
  "hello, world!\n" is a *character string* or a *string constant* and the contents inside it are *characters*
  
  The '\n' is a C notation for a newline character.
  
    printf("hello, world!\n
    ");
    
  will give an error.
  
  printf() does not automatically supply newlines so it's necessary to put them everytime...
  
  This is another program that prints "hello, world" in another way.
  (Refer to [hello-1.c](https://github.com/exilonblack/L-CS/blob/master/TCPL/CP/chapter_1/hello-1.c))
  
    #include <stdio.h>

    main()
    {
        printf("hello, ");
        printf("world")
        printf("\n");
    }
    
  Inside Powershell:
    
    PS cc hello-1.c
    PS ./a
    hello world
    
    
**1.2 Variables and Arithmetic Expressions**

  Words around '/**/' are called comments. It's just there to explain briefly a certain code. It's ignored by the 
  compiler.
 
    /* print Fahrenheit-Celsius table
     for fahr = 0, 20, ..., 300 */
 
  Comments may be placed anywhere with blanks, tabs, and newlines.
  
  In C, variables must be declared before they're used.

  A declaration announces the properties of variables; it consists of a name and a list of variables, such as:

    int fahr, celsius;
    int lower, upper, step;

  int means integer contrast to float which means floating-point numbers.
  
  Computation in the temperature conversion program begins with the assignment statements 
     
    lower = 0;
    upper = 300;
    step = 20;
    
  Each line of the table is computed the same way, so we use a loop that repeats once per output line; this is the 
  purpose of the while loop 
    while (fahr <= upper) {
    ...
    }
    
  The while loop operates as follows: The condition in parentheses is tested. If it is true (fahr is less than or equal 
  to upper), the body of the loop (the three statements enclosed in braces) is executed.
  
  Then the condition is re-tested, and if true, the body is executed again. When the test becomes false (fahr exceeds 
  upper) the loop ends, and execution continues at the statement at follows the loop.
  
  There are no further statements in this program, so it terminates. 

  C does not care about proper indentation and spaces but it's still necessary for a programmer to read.
  
  printf(); is not part of C, it's from a library made by the ANSI stardard.
  
  Dividing integers like: 5/9 will truncate the decimal points since they're both integers and will only take the whole 
  number.
  
  5.0/9.0 however will be computed to its complete value
  
  **<p align='center'>Table of Character notations for %d and %f</p>**
  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>%d</td>
      <td>Print as decimal integer</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>%6d</td>
      <td>Print as decimal integer, at least 6 characters wide</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>%f</td>
      <td>Print as floating point</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>%6f</td>
      <td>Print as floating point, at least 6 characters wide</td>
    </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>%.2f</td>
      <td>Print as floating point, 2 characters after the decimal point</td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
      <td>%6.2f</td>
      <td>print as floating point, at least 6 wide and 2 after decimal point</td>
    </tr>

**1.3 The for statement**

  The for loop three parts:
  
    for(initialization; conditional; step) {
      code goes here...
    }
  
  Initialization is done once, before the loop proper is entered.
  
  Conditional is the second part of the for-loop which controls the loop.
  
  Step is executed and re-evaluates the conditional. If the condition is true, the loop will run otherwise, it 
  terminates.
  
  The choice between while and for is arbitrary, based on which seems clearer. The for is usually appropriate for loops
  in which the initialization and increment are single statements and logically related, since it is more compact than 
  while and it keeps the loop control statements together in one place. 

**1.4 Symbolic Constants**

  #define line defines a symbolic name or symbolic constant to be a particular string of characters: 
   
    #define name replacement list
  
  The quantities LOWER, UPPER and STEP are symbolic constants, not variables, so they do not appear in declarations.    
  Symbolic constant names are conventionally written in upper case so they can ber readily distinguished from lower case 
  variable names.
  
  Notice that there is no semicolon at the end of a #define line.

  I asked a question in [stackoverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/23749559/why-isnt-there-a-semicolon-on-define)
  and two people Hans Passant and Yu Hao said that `#define` is a preprocessor directive which is interpreted and
  doesn't need a semicolon. It seems that semicolons are required for statements only.
  
  The relational `!=` operator means "not equal to".
  
**1.5 Character Input and Output**

  presents a new operator, ++, which means increment by one. You could instead write nc = nc
  + 1 but ++nc is more concise and often more efficient. There is a corresponding operator -- to
  decrement by 1. The operators ++ and -- can be either prefix operators (++nc) or postfix
  operators (nc++); these two forms have different values in expressions, as will be shown in
  Chapter 2, but ++nc and nc++ both increment nc.

  The body of this for loop is empty, because all the work is done in the test and increment parts. But the grammatical 
  rules of C require that a for statement have a body.
  
  The isolated semicolon, called a null statement, is there to satisfy that requirement. We put it on a separate
  line to make it visible. 

  The `if` statement tests the parenthesized condition, and if the condition is true, executes the statement (or group of
  statements in braces) that follows.
  
  The double equals sign `==` is the C notation for ``is equal to''
  
  
  `||` means OR and `\t` means Tab
  
    if (expression)
      statement1
    else
      statement2

  One and only one of the two statements associated with an if-else is performed. If the
  expression is true, statement1 is executed; if not, statement2 is executed. Each statement can be
  a single statement or several in braces. In the word count program, the one after the else is an
  if that controls two statements in braces. 

**1.6 Arrays**

  The declaration 
  
    int ndigit[10];
  
  declares ndigit to be an array of 10 integers. Array subscripts always start at zero in C, so the elements are 
  `ndigit[0], ndigit[1], ..., ndigit[9]`.
  
  This is reflected in the for loops that initialize and print the array. 

  A subscript can be any integer expression, which includes integer variables like i, and integer constants. 

  This particular program relies on the properties of the character representation of the digits.
  
  For example, the test 
  
     if (c >= '0' && c <= '9')
  
  determines whether the character in c is a digit. If it is, the numeric value of that digit is 
  
   c - '0'
  
  This works only if '0', '1', ..., '9' have consecutive increasing values. Fortunately, this
  is true for all character sets. 
  
  By definition, chars are just small integers, so char variables and constants are identical to
  ints in arithmetic expressions.
  
  This is natural and convenient; for example c-'0' is an integer expression with a value between 0 and 9 corresponding 
  to the character '0' to '9' stored in c, and thus a valid subscript for the array ndigit. 

  As a matter of style, it is advisable to format this construction as we have shown; if each `if` were indented past 
  the previous else, a long sequence of decisions would march off the right side of the page. 

**1.7 Functions**
  
  A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some computation, which can then be used without worrying about
  its implementation.
  
  With properly designed functions, it is possible to ignore how a job is done; knowing what is done 
  is sufficient.
  
  A function definition has this form: 
    return-type function-name(parameter declarations, if any)
    {
     declarations
     statements
    }
  
  Function definitions can appear in any order, and in one source file or several, although no function can be split 
  between files.
  
  If the source program appears in several files, you may have to say more to compile and load it than if it all appears 
  in one, but that is an operating system matter, not a language attribute. 
  
  For the moment, we will assume that both functions are in the same file, so whatever you have learned about running C 
  programs will still work. 

  The first line of power itself, 
  
   int power(int base, int n)
  
  declares the parameter types and names, and the type of the result that the function returns.
  
  The names used by power for its parameters are local to power, and are not visible to any other function: other 
  routines can use the same names without conflict. 
  
  This is also true of the variables i and p: the i in power is unrelated to the i in main. 

  We will generally use parameter for a variable named in the parenthesized list in a function.

  The terms formal argument and actual argument are sometimes used for the same distinction. 
  The value that power computes is returned to main by the return: statement.
  
  Any expression may follow return: 
   
   return expression;
  
  A function need not return a value; a return statement with no expression causes control, but no useful value, to be 
  returned to the caller, as does ``falling off the end'' of a function by reaching the terminating right brace.
  
  And the calling function can ignore a value returned by a function. 

**1.8 Arguments - Call by Value**
  
  Call by value is an asset, however, not a liability.
  
  It usually leads to more compact programs with fewer extraneous  variables, because parameters can be treated as 
  conveniently initialized local variables in the called routine.
  
  For example, here is a version of power that makes use of this property. 

**1.9 Character Arrays**
  
  I define arrays to be the collection of *something* it's either collection of `characters`, `numbers`, etc...
  
  Some functions return a useful value; others, like copy, are used only for their effect and return no value. 
  
  The return type of copy is void, which states explicitly that no value is returned. 
  
  `getline` puts the character '\0' (the null character, whose value is zero) at the end of the
  array it is creating, to mark the end of the string of characters.

  The %s format specification in printf expects the corresponding argument to be a string represented in this form.
  
  `copy` also relies on the fact that its input argument is terminated with a '\0', and copies this character into the 
  output. 
  
  It is worth mentioning in passing that even a program as small as this one presents some sticky design problems.
  
  For example, what should main do if it encounters a line which is bigger than its limit? getline works safely, in that 
  it stops collecting when the array is full, even if no newline has been seen. By testing the length and the last 
  character returned, main can determine whether the line was too long, and then cope as it wishes.
  
**1.10 External Variables and Scope**

  The variables in main, such as line, longest, etc., are private or local to main.
  
  Because they are declared within main, no other function can have direct access to them.
  
  The same is true of the variables in other functions; for example, the variable i in getline is unrelated to the i in
  copy.
  
  Each local variable in a function comes into existence only when the function is called,
  and disappears when the function is exited. 
  
  external variables are globally accessible, they can be used instead of argument lists to communicate data between 
  functions.
  
  Furthermore, because external variables remain in existence permanently, rather than appearing and disappearing as 
  functions are called and exited, they retain their values even after the functions that set them have returned. 
  
  An external variable must be defined, exactly once, outside of any function; this sets aside storage for it.
  
  The variable must also be declared in each function that wants to access it; this states the type of the variable.
  
  The declaration may be an explicit extern statement or may be implicit from context.
  To make the discussion concrete, let us rewrite the longest-line program with line, longest, and max as external 
  variables.
  
  This requires changing the calls, declarations, and bodies of all three functions. 

  You should note that we are using the words definition and declaration carefully when we refer to external variables in
  this section.
  
  ``Definition'' refers to the place where the variable is created or assigned storage; ``
  
  declaration'' refers to places where the nature of the variable is stated but no storage is allocated. 
  
  By the way, there is a tendency to make everything in sight an extern variable because it appears to simplify 
  communications - argument lists are short and variables are always there when you want them.
  
  But external variables are always there even when you don't want them.
  
  Relying too heavily on external variables is fraught with peril since it leads to programs whose data connections are 
  not all obvious - variables can be changed in unexpected and even inadvertent ways, and the program is hard to modify. 
  
  The second version of the longest-line program is inferior to the first, partly for these reasons, and partly because 
  it destroys the generality of two useful functions by writing into them the names of the variables they manipulate. 
