PS L-CS\TCPL\C1\> more C2.md
====

The C Programming Language Chapter 2 - Types, Operators and Expressions

Variables and constants are the basic data objects manipulated in a program.

Declarations list the variables to be used, and state what type they have and perhaps what their initial values are.

Operators specify what is to be done to them.

Expressions combine variables and constants to produce new values. The type of an object determines the set of values it
can have and what operations can be performed on it.

**2.1 Variable Names**

  Names are made up of letters and digits; the first character must be a letter.
  
  The underscore ``_'' counts as a letter; it is sometimes useful for improving the readability of long variable names. 
  
  Don't begin variable names with underscore, however, since library routines often use such names. Upper and lower case 
  letters are distinct, so x and X are two different names.
  
  Traditional C practice is to use lower case for variable names, and all upper case for symbolic constants. 
  
  At least the first 31 characters of an internal name are significant.
  
  For function names and external variables, the number may be less than 31, because external names may be used by
  assemblers and loaders over which the language has no control.
  
  For external names, the standard guarantees uniqueness only for 6 characters and a single case.
  
  Keywords like `if`, `else`, `int`, `float`, etc., are reserved: you can't use them as variable names. They must be in 
  lower case. 

  It's wise to choose variable names that are related to the purpose of the variable, and that are unlikely to get mixed 
  up typographically.
  
  **2.2 Data Types and Sizes**
  
  **<p align='center'> C TYPES</p>**
  
  <table>
    <tr>
      <td>Type</td>
      <td>Description</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>`char`</td>
      <td>a single byte, capable of holding one character in the local character set</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>`int`</td>
      <td>an integer, typically reflecting the natural size of integers on the host machine</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>`float`</td>
      <td>single-precision floating point</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>`double`</td>
      <td>double-precision floating point</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
  
  In addition, there are a number of qualifiers that can be applied to these basic types. short and long apply to 
  integers: 
 
    short int sh;
    long int counter;
    
  The word int can be omitted in such declarations, and typically it is.
  
  The intent is that short and long should provide different lengths of integers where practical; `int` will normally be
  the natural size for a particular machine.
  
  `short` is often 16 bits long, and `int` either 16 or 32 bits.
  
  Each compiler is free to choose appropriate sizes for its own hardware, subject only to the the restriction that 
  `short`s and `int`s are at least 16 bits, `longs` are at least 32 bits, and `short` is no longer than `int`, which is no
  longer  than `long`. 

  The qualifier `signed` or `unsigned` may be applied to `char` or any integer. `unsigned` numbers are always positive or 
  zero, and obey the laws of arithmetic modulo `2^n`, where `n` is the number of bits in the type.
  
  So, for instance, if `chars` are 8 bits, `unsigned` char variables have values between 0 and 255, while `signed` chars 
  have values between -128 and 127 (in a two's complement machine.)
  
  Whether plain chars are signed or unsigned is machine-dependent, but printable characters are always positive. 

  The type `long double` specifies extended-precision floating point. As with integers, the sizes of floating-point 
  objects are implementation-defined; `float`, `double` and `long double` could represent one, two or three distinct 
  sizes. 
  
  The standard headers `<limits.h>` and `<float.h>` contain symbolic constants for all of these sizes, along with other 
  properties of the machine and compiler.

**2.3 Constants**

  An integer constant like 1234 is an `int`. A `long` constant is written with a terminal l (ell) or L, as in 123456789L;
  an integer constant too big to fit into an int will also be taken as a `long`.
  
  Unsigned constants are written with a terminal u or U, and the suffix ul or UL indicates `unsigned long`. 

  `e` in `1e-2` is an exponent.
  
  The value of an integer can be specified in octal or hexadecimal instead of decimal.
  
  A leading 0 (zero) on an integer constant means octal; a leading 0x or 0X means hexadecimal.
  
  For example, decimal 31 can be written as 037 in octal and 0x1f or 0x1F in hex.
  
  Octal and hexadecimal constants may also be followed by L to make them `long` and U to make them `unsigned`: 
  0XFUL is an unsigned `long` constant with value 15 decimal. 

  A character constant is an integer, written as one character within single quotes, such as 'x'. 
  
  The value of a character constant is the numeric value of the character in the machine's character set.
  
  For example, in the ASCII character set the character constant '0' has the value 48, which is unrelated to the numeric 
  value 0. 
  
  If we write '0' instead of a numeric value like 48 that depends on the character set, the program is independent of the
  particular value and easier to read.
  
  Character constants participate in numeric operations just as any other integers, although they are most often used in 
  comparisons with other characters. 

  A constant expression is an expression that involves only constants.
  
  Such expressions may be evaluated at during compilation rather than run-time, and accordingly may be used in any place
  that a constant can occur, as in 
 
    #define MAXLINE 1000
    char line[MAXLINE+1];

  or 
 
    #define LEAP 1 /* in leap years */
    int days[31+28+LEAP+31+30+31+30+31+31+30+31+30+31];
    
  A string constant, or string literal, is a sequence of zero or more characters surrounded by double quotes, as in 
 
    "I am a string"

  or 
 
    "" /* the empty string */

  The quotes are not part of the string, but serve only to delimit it.
  
  The same escape sequences used in character constants apply in strings; \" represents the double-quote character. 
  
  String constants can be concatenated at compile time: 
 
    "hello, " "world"

  is equivalent to 
 
    "hello, world"

  This is useful for splitting up long strings across several source lines. 

  Technically, a string constant is an array of characters. The internal representation of a string has a null character 
  '\0' at the end, so the physical storage required is one more than the number of characters written between the quotes. 
  This representation means that there is no limit to how long a string can be, but programs must scan a string 
  completely to determine its length.
  
  The standard library function `strlen`(s) returns the length of its character string argument s, excluding the terminal
  '\0'. Here is our version:
 
    /* strlen: return length of s */
    int strlen(char s[])
    {
      int i;
      while (s[i] != '\0')
        ++i;
      return i;
    }

  `strlen` and other string functions are declared in the standard header `<string.h>`.

  There is one other kind of constant, the enumeration constant. An enumeration is a list of constant integer values, as 
  in 
   
      enum boolean { NO, YES };
  
  The first name in an enum has value 0, the next 1, and so on, unless explicit values are specified.
  
  If not all values are specified, unspecified values continue the progression from the last specified value, as the 
  second of these examples: 
  
    enum escapes { BELL = '\a', BACKSPACE = '\b', TAB = '\t',
    NEWLINE = '\n', VTAB = '\v', RETURN = '\r' };
     
    enum months { JAN = 1, FEB, MAR, APR, MAY, JUN,
    JUL, AUG, SEP, OCT, NOV, DEC };
   
    /* FEB = 2, MAR = 3, etc. */
  
  Names in different enumerations must be distinct. Values need not be distinct in the same enumeration. 
  
  Enumerations provide a convenient way to associate constant values with names, an alternative to `#define` with the 
  advantage that the values can be generated for you.
  
  Although variables of `enum` types may be declared, compilers need  not check that what you store in such a variable is
  a valid value for the enumeration.
  
  Nevertheless, enumeration variables offer the chance of checking and so are often better than #defines.
  
  In addition, a debugger may be able toprintvalues of enumeration variables in their symbolic form. 

**2.4 Declarations**
  
  All variables must be declared before use, although certain declarations can be made implicitly by content.
  
  A declaration specifies a type, and contains a list of one or more variables of that type, as in 

    int lower, upper, step;
    char c, line[1000];

  Variables can be distributed among declarations in any fashion; the lists above could well be written as:
    
    int lower;
    int upper;
    int step;
    char c;
    char line[1000];

  The latter form takes more space, but is convenient for adding a comment to each declaration for subsequent 
  modifications.
  
  A variable may also be initialized in its declaration. If the name is followed by an equals sign and an expression, the
  expression serves as an initializer, as in 
 
    char esc = '\\';
    int i = 0;
    int limit = MAXLINE+1;
    float eps = 1.0e-5;

  If the variable in question is not automatic, the initialization is done once only, conceptionally before the program 
  starts executing, and the initializer must be a constant expression.
  
  An explicitly initialized automatic variable is initialized each time the function or block it is in i entered;
  
  the initializer may be any expression. External and static variables are initialized to zero by default.
  
  Automatic variables for which is no explicit initializer have undefined (i.e., garbage) values. 

  The qualifier const can be applied to the declaration of any variable to specify that its value will not be changed. 
  
  For an array, the const qualifier says that the elements will not be altered.
  
    const double e = 2.71828182845905;
    const char msg[] = "warning: ";

  The const declaration can also be used with array arguments, to indicate that the function does not change that array: 
 
    int strlen(const char[]);

  The result is implementation-defined if an attempt is made to change a const. 

**2.5 Arithmetic Operators**

  Integer division truncates any fractional part. The expression 
 
    x % y

  produces the remainder when x is divided by y, and thus is zero when y divides x exactly.
  
  For example, a year is a leap year if it is divisible by 4 but not by 100, except that years divisible by 400 are leap 
  years. Therefore: 

  if ((year % 4 == 0 && year % 100 != 0) || year % 400 == 0)
    printf("%d is a leap year\n", year);
  else
    printf("%d is not a leap year\n", year);

  The `%` operator cannot be applied to a `float` or `double`. The direction of truncation for `/` and the sign of the 
  result  for `%` are machine-dependent for negative operands, as is the action taken on overflow or underflow. 

**2.6 Relational and Logical Operators**

  The relational operators are: `>=`, `<=`, `>`, `<` and the logical operators are `&&` and `||`.
  
  The precedence of && is higher than that of ||, and both are lower than relational and equality operators, so 
  expressions like 
  
  
